Hey folks. Today's episode was
sponsored by Datadog it's. A
cloud scale monitoring and analytics
platform. Datadog was built to
bring clarity to complex dynamic
applications in the cloud, on
premises in containers or wherever
they run with beautiful dashboards,
distributed tracing, and seamless integrations
with more than 200 technologies,
including Azure and Docker and
PagerDuty Datadog provides deep end
to end visibility into the
health and performance of modern
apps. Visualize key metrics, set
alerts to identify anomalies and
collaborate with your team to
troubleshoot and fix issues fast.
I'd like you to try
it yourself by starting a
free 14 day trial today,
listeners of this podcast will
also get a free Datadog
t-shirt get started at bitly.com/data
dog shirt. That's bitly.com/datadog shirt,
Friends. This is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Christoph Cieslak who works
on the safe stack. S
a F E. How are
you? I'm fine. Thanks. Thanks
for having me. Yeah, no
worries. So the S we've
heard about the lamp stack
Linux and Apache, and what
is the safe stack? So
safe stack is similar technology
stack, just built from the
F sharp technologies and F
sharp.net functional first programming language.
And on our webpage, we
have this soft speech, which
says basically SciFest and functional
first stock for cloud ready
web development, that focus on
type safe programming. And that's
like a lot of buzzwords.
And I guess we can
go deeper into that in
a moment. Well, the, the,
if someone is listening to
this show, they may be
a C sharp programmer, and
they probably just load up
visual studio, go file new
project. And they probably use
asp.net MVC. So they're familiar
with the model view controller,
but, you know, there's, some
people will change that they'll
use open source software and
add to it. But I
think there are a group
of people that accept the
defaults. And I think that
the safe stack is great
because it's none of the
defaults, isn't it? Yeah. It's
like, it's all the parts.
Well, all the parts of
Asia, which is a, in
our safe acronym, it's like
open source technology built by
an affluent community. So maybe
I will go like letter
by letter and say, what
are the technologies we use?
So S S suave it's
Web library, backend web library
and implementation of web server,
which is basically what, or
whatever, everything that you need
to put on the backend
then a, is Asia for
the hosting, because like we
live in the.net world and
Asia is great fit for
the hosting.net applications. Then we
have F F S N
fable fable is F set
up to JavaScript compiler. And
I know that you had
episode with Alfonzo couple of
weeks ago who created fiber.
So that's great technology that
enables us to write extra
code and Tran this extra
code in the browser. And
then he is a L
Mitch Elvis is a F
sharp implement fable F sharp
implementation of so-called Elm architecture.
And that's like, just not
going too deep into details,
but that's just UI library.
We, we use and we
recommend for everyone because we
think that it's good UI
way to build UI in
the browser. Okay. So let's
dig into these a little
bit at a time. So
suave is a lightweight nonblocking
web server. Isn't Kestrel, a
web server. Ah, yes, indeed.
Castro is also lightweight nonblocking
, which is really good.
The difference is that swath
was created before the, there
was even an idea for
the Castro, or maybe, I
don't know the dates, it's
like older technology than, than,
than the.net Corey and the
Castro. So it's been around
for a couple of years
right now. So, so that's
why we use that, but
also after community created another
great project called giraffe, which
is implementation of same programming
model as in suave, just
on top of Castro and
isp.net code. So you can
take your basically similar helper
functions and similar building blocks
that you use in suave
and put them on top
of the, of the asp.net
core, if you prefer doing
Oh, okay. Now suave, does
suave use a live UV
underneath it? Or what is
the socket library? Yeah, I
believe that for Dalenex it
your sleep UV? Okay. So
giraffe is a again, functional
web framework for F sharp
developer built on top of
Kestrel. Could I have the
safe stack or the, I
don't know what it would
be GAF E GAF stack.
Could I swap them out
or is it not quite
as easy as swapping? Yeah,
you totally could swap those
things out. Actually you can
swap probably every part of
safe stack. If you, if
you want, just like with
lamp stack, people were swapping
like B man, like ADA
or PHP, Python, or battle,
whatever people wanted to use.
We've saved stock. You can,
you can do for the
first letter, you can do
SWAT for the giraffe, for
the AE. You can do
Asia, or maybe you want
to do hosting on AWS.
And then for the front
end things, we recommend using
fable as an F sort
of way. But as well,
you can use something else.
If you prefer to write
normal JavaScript, What, what do
you think is going on
in the community? That's so
exciting that gives us so
many choices. Like, I think
it's great now. Like we
went from having only IIS
to choose from, and now
we've got all these different
things. Like it doesn't have
to be just Kestrel or
just suave or just draft,
like, it's so cool that
we have choices now. And
I want, like, I want
like the corporate developer to
know that it's good to
have choices. Like there has,
doesn't have to be a
winner. I think that, well,
there are two, two sides
of this question. First of
all, the, if we talk
just about F sort of
community after community was always
focused, bit more on the
open sort of side of
things. And like sub competitor
was open source before the,
the C-sharp competitor was open
source. There was excerpts after
the foundation was created before
the dotnet software, the foundation.
So I've of always was
this pushing forward boundary of
open source in dotnet ecosystem,
answering the other part about
general.net ecosystem and some model
choices in, in that I
think that with this whole
change of Microsoft being more
friendly to open source in
general, it just encourages people
to, to build cool stuff
on.net. And if people build
cool, cool stuff on the
internet, other people are starting
to use it. And we
have this nice raving ecosystem.
Why do you think that
the F sharp community was
so open source? Like from
the beginning, because it was
like in the early 2000
tens it's it's been years
and years and years, they
have shop communities being been
pushing open source. Right. 2005
was when F sharp came
out. Yes. And even back
then in 2005, when AFTRA
came out, the F set
up compiler was released together
with its sort of scout.
So that was like in
2005, you could download the
source code of f-stop compiler
and compile that. And that
was like something that no
other Microsoft product did back
then. I think that's lot
of, lot of this push
towards open source was cost.
First of all, thanks to
Don Syme, who was designer
of the, of the language
and who really understood how,
how much importance community can
have. And, and because he
had also some different backgrounds
than only dotnet, he has
seen how, how it works
out in other ecosystems. Other
thing is the lot of
people were really excited about
Chabad. Microsoft support for EFSF
was not always so good
as for the C sharp
visual basic, and people were
kind of forced into building
their own tools, their own
ecosystem. And that's why that's
how, how it started. And
I joined, I joined AFTRA
community a bit later than
that. And that was like
doing open source was just
default default behavior when I
started doing F sharp. So
people I knew from the
internet and people who I've
seen under conferences, and I've
met them personally, they were
just doing open source. So
when I've joined the community,
it was like, Oh, I
guess that's how I've sort
of people at all. So
that's what we do. Yeah.
That's a really good point.
I think that there's a
couple of things there to
parse first that Don Syme
was out of Microsoft research.
So kind of F sharp
kind of like snuck out
of research because it's like,
Hey, look at this cool
research thing that we're doing
while the P the product
people at Microsoft were off
trying to focus on products
while Don was just making
something, you know, that was
cool and amazing. And like
you said, open source by
default. And while dotnet core
is open source by default
now you've got a tenure
tenure jumpstart with F sharp,
right. Everything's been opened by
default as a community for
a decade or longer. Yes,
indeed. And I really believe
that's, that's like one of
the huge parts of success
in comparison to some other
languages that we have. On
the one hand, we have
this strong induced, industrial already
ecosystem of dotnet net and,
and in general Microsoft stack.
But, but then at the
same time, we have all
many great people doing, doing
their own things, open source
things, and then community supporting
this open source things. And
I think that's, that's really
great and helpful for just
creating courage ecosystem one where
people can choose whatever fits
they need. Yeah, exactly. And
that's a really good point,
I would say. And maybe
you would agree F sharp
really was about choice from
the beginning, because, you know,
in 2005, you didn't have
to use visual studio use
Emacs if it makes you
happy. Right? Like they had
support for editors years and
years before other, you know,
before C sharp and Omni
sharp happen. You've got support
for VIM and Emacs and
sublime. And, you know, I,
and I had for Adam
and visual studio code, like
any editor anywhere at all,
you can do do this.
And also didn't have sharp
starts supporting mano very early.
Yes. I think that, that,
like back home just a
couple years after the first
release of F shrub, there
was huge effort also from
community to, to port F
sharp, to mano, and like
Dave Thomas, who is like,
I've set up an NVP
and worked for Zamani studio
for Xamarin for awhile, did
great, great job of product
piloting F sharp to the,
to the mono and also
to the iOS and, and
all these different devices that,
that with some money and
supports, Let's pivot a little
bit. And explain to me
the relationship between suave and
like, what is the
responsibility of each of those
two pieces? So Esther challis
swath is our backend. Usually
we suggest people try to
just some kind of API,
like crest, API APIs with
it, and then fable and
El Mitch are the part
that's responsible for doing the
UI in the browser. So
they are responsible for creating
single page applications that looks
nice and tend to have
like all the form of
Santa and, and all the
stuff. So basically swath is
a backend and then fable
and omission is a front
end off of our stack.
I see. Would you say
suave, something that has views
like MVC, or is swab
primarily about web APIs? A
suave can do views like
MVC, but from what I've
noticed in both like my
open source journey and, and
like Mark my commercial projects,
people usually use suave as
just API as a way
to, to just cost and
API and points. So just
set up some data in
Jason or XML, and then
build client side views, client
side applications on top of
that. Okay. So then LMS
is the, is the pattern,
it's the abstractions that you
need to do? You're, you're
not model view controller, but
model view, updates style, the
way that the Elm people
do it. Yes, indeed. The,
I guess the, the call
pattern was known for a
while. And like, as you
said, it's model view update,
but everyone calls it is
because probably the most, one
of the first really successful
implementations of this pattern. I
know that nowadays, if you
do modern JavaScript with react
to JS and reduced JS,
you basically implement the same
model view, update pattern just
in bit more complex way.
But also if you do
some maybe desktop applications using
reactive extensions, the resulted code
can look really similar to
the, to the model view,
update pattern. So maybe going
a bit more into this
model view update, the pattern
is simple. Model is just
a simple, plain type that
class that represents the, the
state of your application, then
view is an function that
takes existing model. That takes
some message, some, something that
happens in your application and
produces new model representing new
state of your application. And
that was update. And the
view view is basically also
simple function that takes model
current state of your application
and prints out some HTML
or whatever or whatever. And
during QS, in case of
El Mitch in Fibo, we
use a usual year react,
a surrendering engine. So we
built also on the industry
ready and battle-tested solution from
Facebook. Hey friends, a quick
word from our sponsor progress.
Telerik wants to send someone
to the build conference. So
they're having a contest. Step
one is to sign up,
to learn about the new,
innovative, modern UI tools that
there'll be announcing at build.
And by registering, you'll be
entered to win a full
conference pass to Microsoft build,
plus a $500 travel stipend.
They're also giving away three
Tellerik dev craft UI licenses.
All you have to do
is register at build contest
dot plop that's PW, Oop,
dot me. That's built contest
dot  dot me progress
offers the leading platform for
developing and deploying mission, critical
business applications, and that they
are the creator of the
award winning tellerik.net and Kendo,
UI JavaScript, user interface controls.
They have reporting solutions and
productivity tools and all the
tools that developers need to
build high performance, modern apps
without standing UI go now
to build contest dot
dot me that's PW, Oop,
dot me, and sign up
to win. Okay. So let
me see if I understand
this because, because web applications
that interact with humans go
through state, they have to
go through multiple States like
you're in the login state,
or you're in the creating
objects state. You know, that
that state is a part
of human's life, but in
F sharp, you know, you're
not just assigning variables and
changing state you're, you have
to create these immutable things,
right? So you're moving through
these different States. You're finding
a balance between the state
of the UI and state,
as it is represented in
F sharp and model view
update means that the model
keeps changing and new instances
of the model kind of
March forward. Is that correct?
Yes. That's basically the, the
really good description of the
pattern. What's really nice about,
about the El Misha implementation
in Fibo. And what's really
nice also about Elm implement
original element implementation is that
both of those implementations basically
hide the fact that you
have some mutable state under
the hood, because, well, as
you've said, the applications are
mutable that the bros are
like dumb. The model is
mutable. So web applications are
just immutable applications, and we
kinda cannot work around that,
but we can hide this
mutable state under the there's
some framework that we built.
And El Mitch is this,
this framework, that two that
we used it from point
of view of F sharp
developer, both view and update
functions are just pure functions
that just takes one, one
data and outputs. Some other
data don't perform really side-effects.
And so don't do some
magical stuff and don't mutate
new some global variables or
anything like that. And the
whole rendering views and changing
your real state of application.
That's saved. Someone is handled
by, by both Elemis and
react to JS. I see.
Okay. So if you, if
you want to hurt yourself,
you could potentially hurt yourself
by writing your own JavaScript,
but can you write a
safe application and an Elvish
application only with F sharp,
never writing any custom JavaScript
of your own? Yes, yes.
Basically from point of view
of normal user that just
do an, a simple single
page application. You just create
new new application from dotnet
new template, and then you
write plain functions and that's
all, that's all you need.
Wow. When I hear as
a, you know, maybe I'm
not an F sharp developer,
I'm just learning, but when
I hear about things that
compile to JavaScript, and I
think I'm also speaking for
the listener, I think, do
I want to bet my
company on a thing that
compiles a JavaScript? Because I
think we have an image
in our mind that it's
going to compile to weird
JavaScript, you know, like unreadable,
JavaScript. I mean, first of
all, you are to give,
you probably are using TypeScript
or something like that. So
you are already using some
compilation to JavaScript, even, even
if you write Java script,
you really often do some
JavaScript to JavaScript compilation with
Bible. And the Bible is
a tool that enables you
to write new modern ish
JavaScript and compile it to
play in all the birding
JavaScript that's supported by all
our browsers. That's that's second
thing. And the first thing
fable actually uses Bible under
the hood. I think that
our funds are talked a
bit that on the other
podcast, but basically what fireball
does is it doesn't manually
outputs, JavaScript code as a
text, but instead it takes
F sharp abstract syntax tree
transforms this abstract abstract syntax
tree into the abstract syntax
tree that Bible understands and
feeds it to Bible. And
then Bible is responsible for
outputting JavaScript. And the Bible
is really popular tool in
JavaScript ecosystem. So it's really
battle tested and tend to
be really powerful. And one
of the, of the things
they focus on as a
Bible project and Bible communities
outputting nice readable, JavaScript code,
that can be, is it
in the, in, inside the
browser and to end with
all tools that JavaScript ecosystem
has. So in a case
of, of, of this stock,
I don't think that's really
a problem just like it's
not a problem in case
of That is a very,
very good explanation. And it's
really great. People should check
out that show and they
should also check out fable
F a B L e.io.
What's nice is that you
can go up there and
compile in the browser. So
I'm actually, I've got F
sharp on the left here,
and I can hit all
the enter. It will show
me the code on the
right. And if you line
it up, like it's really
close, like it's, you can
see it. It's not like
it's compiling into unreadable assembly
language. You know, it's really
quite amazing. You get to
write the language that makes
you happy and then create
the language that runs in
the browser. It's pretty extraordinary.
Yes. And it's really an
important advantage of fable in
general, in comparison to some
other choices in compile to
JavaScript ecosystem, because it enables
us to do really deep
integration with existing JavaScript tooling,
because we output JavaScript. That's
understood by, by normal JavaScript
tools like Webpack and stuff
like that. Oh, that's a
very good point. So if
I let them be, let
me ask you this, then
let's talk about integration. If
I'm a company that has
some existing intellectual property in
JavaScript, and maybe I have
some existing.net DLLs that are
in C-sharp or VB, and
I'm looking at the safe
stack, I can combine my
F sharp libraries with my
sharp libraries and my fable
with existing JavaScript that I
have Indeed combining F sharp
and C sharp is pretty
straightforward. It's just normal DLL
that reference or normal product
reference normal nuggets package, depending
on how you, how you
do it in your company
for the integration between a
fable. So F running in
the browser and JavaScript because
modern JavaScript has this functionality
of modules. And, and like
all NPM and stuff are
following one convention, how to
do things and how to
pack things. You can say
something like, I want to
import just one function from
this file and say, it's
like in f-stop file, say,
I require a function called,
do something from file. A
BC dot JS, and Webpack
will put it together. And
you will just use your
JavaScript in dis from F
sharp, because under the hood,
it's actually just compared to
normal Java scripts that required
a statement. And it's normal.
JavaScript had quite a segment.
I compiled by, by Webpack
and bundled together, and all
magic is done. So yes,
you can easily adjust, use
both. So you start up
from F up on the
backend and JavaScript on the
weave from F sharp on
the front end, which is
really nice in one, in
one of the demos we
have somewhere, we are building
application using both TypeScript and
abstract in one file, and
all the link is working
together. So the watch mode
we have, so this automatic
recompilation, we do change in
the, in the type through
file. We save types of
TypeScript file. Everything gets recompiled,
and ultimately the refresh in
the browser, we do change
in file and the same
happen, the sentence you can
edit both TypeScript, JavaScript, and
F sharp fiber code at
the same time and have
this nice developer experience. Yeah,
I do want to point
out also, if you looked
at the safe stack homepage
about halfway down, it says,
retrofit your existing stack. It's
got some really good examples
that I was impressed with
where it says, Oh, already
using web API. That's cool.
Use, use the safe, you
know, use these parts of
the safe stack. Or if
you want to write your
own sequel, that's cool. You
don't have to, you know,
you don't have to pick
the whole stack. You pick
the piece that you already,
you want to, and then
you plug it into the
code you already have, which
is pretty sweet. Yes. And
again, I think that that's
something really important for us
because not every product is
Greenfield project. Not, not every
company is willing to bet
on four different technologies that
they don't know, maybe they
want to risk unjust front-end
or something. So it's not
like that. We try to
sell safe as a do
safe. Don't do anything else
and just use the technologies.
We suggest we really believe
into this integration with existing
ecosystems. Yeah. And people can
set this up on their
machines really easily without like,
it won't hurt your machine.
Like I went and hooked
up the dotnet CLI safe
template. So now I can
say dotnet new safe. And
it just kind of, it's
just another template that sits
alongside the other things I
can be playing with the
safe stack while I'm doing
my C sharp in my
regular job. So safe can
kind of sneak into my
life. And until maybe I'm
using it completely. Yes. I'm
obviously for the, for the
front end part, you need
also to have some other
dependencies like node and PM
or yarn. But I think
nowadays that's not really like
dangerous dependency and a lot
of people have it installed
under machines. So For the
JavaScript and the, and the
ultimately the table underneath. Yes,
indeed. Hmm. One of the
things that I think is
worth pointing out that I
was really surprised about is
the, the demo that you've
got of the safe stack
as it applies to react
native. So now you're using
F sharp to write a
mobile application. Yes, that's really
great. Yeah. And, and that's
works just fine. It's using
react native, as you've said.
So we again has this
battle tested technology from Facebook,
and we just simply compiled
to the, to the react
native and then react native
tooling does its magic to
compile for the Android and
iOS devices. So this is
really great. What's also really
important when, when we talk
about these different compilation targets
is that you can set
your domain of your, your
code between all those targets.
So I know companies that
have basically same code, same
domain browser on the mobile
applications on the backend, and
also on the Azure functions,
for example. So this enables
people to be highly productive,
because really often, when you
do those different, different applications,
different client, client applications, you
need to repeat some code
because, Oh, the browser is
written in JavaScript and the
publication is written in C
sharp in XAML. And we
fable, and we've saved stuck
in general. You can easily
share your code across the
domain, across the different clients
and different parts of the
stack. The, the most impressive
thing that, of all of
this, that I think is
how clean the, the hot
module replacement is. I know
that you use Webpack for
that, but I think it's
worth giving the people who
are listening a task. You
should go and check out
the safe bookstore. Maybe you
can explain how this works,
because I'm looking at this
animation where, you know, someone
has local host, 80, 80
up, and they make a
change to some F sharp
code, not a, not a
CSS, HTML, not some HTML.
And they hit refresh, but
they literally change F sharp
hits save. And the webpage
changes, but doesn't lose state.
How is that possible? That's
basically Is some Webpack magic,
but because the client code
using El Mitch is really
structured and works with these
messages that just change state.
It's really easy to basically
the current current state of
your application is just set
of messages that mutates the
state. So it's really easy
for Webpack to just, Oh,
this is, this is this
list of the messages that
happen. This actions that modify
the state, we shouldn't touch
that. And then, Oh, we
can refer to the rest,
the rest of the code.
So that's really nice. It's
actually from what I've heard,
and I'm not super experienced,
like react and to the
Duke's developer, but from what
I've heard, these hot module
replacement is actually working better
in El Mitch than it
works originally in reactor, Dukes,
even, even Facebook, Facebook on
through webpage has this information
that, Oh, we have this
hot module replacement, but it
usually causes some problems and
it might not be super
perfect in case of Amish
applications. It just works. And
it's like amazing. And it
gives really, really nice and
totally different experience of editing
care applications, because you don't
need to repeat all actions
to bring you to Allstate.
Yeah. It's really interesting. It
took me a moment to
figure out what was going
on, but you're actually running
two different web servers at
the same time. Right? You're
running the.net, watch on your
application for things like your
unit test, which then launches
your server. But then you've
got a Webpack dev server
that fable supports on another
port and these things happen
automatically. So you're running two
things at the same time,
one to run your app
and one to support your
development. Yes, indeed. Most of
the configure, of course it
requires some configuration, but most
of the configuration is done
automatically when you create the
application with DotNetNuke save template.
So basically when you create
the new safe, you should
have all these things ready
to work and just press
a five in visual studio
code and it will start
everything and it will just
work. Yeah. Once I had
yarn and node installed, yarn
is an NPM package manager.
I installed, I saw node,
I installed yarn. I put
on dotnet SDK. I ended
up using packet and, and
it just worked any, and
of course I could even
use Docker for my deployment
at the end. I think
it took me 15 minutes
to get that working. And
it was really amazing. Yeah.
So I'm just happy to
hear that, that you had
really good experience with that.
And I really think that
there are actually still some
places in the, in the
hall, especially on the Fibo
site where the developer experience
can be made better and
does like huge, huge, huge
effort right now right now
is made to make some
things a bit better. Because
as we, as we are
talking here, you need to
have some knowledge about this
weird JavaScript things I'm talking
about. So you need to
understand that, Oh, you are
using react for the rendering
engine and it has some,
some features and send some
stuff happens because of that.
And then you have to
use this web thing for
this hot module replacement. And
while it is configured, when
it stops working probably as
normal.net developer or someone who
haven't played with the, with
the fountain stuck so far,
you don't know what's going
on. So we kinda like,
especially Alfonzo is working on
the, on making all this
stuff it's nicer. Well, it
was, there was some magic,
but the nice thing about
it is that it's magic,
open source all the way
down. So as long as
you understand the stack you'll
have a good experience. Yes,
indeed. Fantastic. Also one more
thing. Probably another important thing
I want to mention is
that the safe stack has,
it's not only like those
couple of libraries put together
about, we actually provide a
couple of companies, provide commercial
support for this stock. So
if an a company is
interested in having some commercial
support, because I totally understand
that not everyone wants to
just buy into this open
source stack, not having an
inquire aunties and not having
any help other than dinner,
asking questions on GitHub. So
if any company and
has this need to have
formal commercial support for, for
such applications that are a
couple of companies that, that
provides that. And I think
that's also really important from
just F sort of community
point of view because after
community, for a lot of
time had this, there was
this opinion about deaf community.
Oh, it's just bunch of
those crazy open sort of
skips that are, they just
do those stuff for fun.
And no one is using
this commercially and tent safe,
stuck also showing that, that
there are some companies that
work on that and provide
support with F serpent. This
stuck in particular, That is
a very good point. And
if you go to safe,
hyphen stack.github.io, you can see
that there's not only a
rich community, but there's companies
like Lambda factory in compensational
it and others and others.
So just like when you
use open source, like node,
you call node source with
the safe stack, there is
a community of people putting
this stuff into production who
can help you commercially and,
and make you successful. I
really appreciate you chatting with
me today. Thanks. It was
great experience for me and
happy, happy, happy, too. Happy
to share Stuff. Fantastic. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.